We are doing uh sort of an informal
conversation with Patricia P today and
we we'll have time for some Q&A. Um if
anyone has questions you can put them
type them in the chat. Um it is our
pleasure. We are lucky to have Patricia
today on her which she just informed us
her wedding anniversary. So thank you
for that Patricia.
>> The sacrifices of of medical community
never cease. Call it a mistake, Travis.
>> Yes.
>> So, we we we're going to talk about
integrative oncology. A bit of my
background. I am um an author. I've
written three books on the health care
system um academically approached cancer
from uh uh thesis work on a on a
graduate work um through the metabolic
lens which we'll I'm sure we'll talk
about with my my first foray was Tom
Safe's book cancer is a metabolic
disease which spun off into a lot of
interesting things um clinics using
repurposed drugs a foundation where we
are funding the uh the largest clinical
trial of the ketogenic diet in the US
which is absolely
mindblowing that it's at Cedar Cyanide
and and four other incredible top-notch
universities. U so this this these ideas
are are being adopted now. Uh and and
Patricia, you I know you have an
interesting background. You you had two
feet firmly planted in the traditional
oncology world
>> and then you broke away and started an
integrative clinic. So So if you can
give us a little background.
>> Right. So that yeah quite quite quite
some time ago now before oh no before
the internet
and before the kind of advancement of
information and science I I was just I
was I I did my palative care and
oncology and particularly um running the
oncology clinics I began to it it was a
combination of several things actually I
first of all massively always always
interested by cancer I just find it
mindblowing
right from when I first learned the very
early kind of biology and physiology of
it is what is going on here because it's
running rings around everybody and then
getting into actually you know kind of
treating it with what's worse those days
the very traditional chemotherapies and
none of the targeted um targeted
therapies at all and I you know facing
all the challenges of that interesting
times in those days very interesting
times Because the whole relationship
with oncology for what I call clients,
patients is very different to what it is
now. Entirely different. It was very um
very expert led by the doctors. People
didn't have information. They didn't
have an awful lot of questions and they
had an awful lot of trust in the medical
world and what we were doing. And not a
lot of information was given. It's
really interesting that actually because
now one of the regular conversations I
have with clients is they can't tell me
often enough what my prognosis is and
you know sort of tell me when that you
know that the the treatment is only
going to work for so long. In those days
it was entirely different. So we took
people down that road down that path of
having the treatment not really knowing
what's going on. um we having a good
idea of when resistance was going to
develop and we were going to run out of
options if so they but with that also um
far less nuance than it is now control
side effects um cexia all those I did a
lot of GI cancers lymphas breast cancer
and through that uh there was a lot of a
lot of questions I had to ask myself at
times about whether we were actually
doing people an awful lot of
You know, the people we had when we
started their treatment were not the
same people at the end. And then they
they became the disconnect in the
relationships that we had very much
because uh uh it started off very
trusting and then it became very
untrusting.
But from that though it was actually as
everything in integrated morcology has
been right right from the get-go right
from the offset has been driven by
people with cancer. And it was actually
through my patients then that I got to
know some who were um doing integrated
approaches as they were then. They were
doing certain diets particularly uh in
GI department IV treatments etc. And I I
I'm very inquisitive but I got very
interested in what they were doing. um
particularly when I began to notice that
they were doing quite well and not just
not just from the cancer perspective but
everything spiritually, physically,
emotionally, you know, that sense of
control they had. There's one lady,
Jenny, who complet well she didn't
inspire me so much as bullying me into
doing this sexually. Um she used to work
in London and she come up to Nottingham
where I worked every 3 weeks and had a
treatment. She kind of burst through the
door full of energy far more than me and
she was doing IV bitsy. She was doing a
you know kind of detoxing kind of diet
that she was and I I remember standing
outside her door. Um and at that time I
think we switched over to the Oxop
Platin type drugs and we were looking at
her scan and the oncologist was going
this is the best best result I've ever
had you know and of course she wasn't
telling him so we were just going yeah
very great and it was through that that
I I began to I began to have become more
disenchanted with what we're doing. I
couldn't answer anyone's questions. That
was a major frustration. One of my great
passions now is treating keexia.
Actually, I'm very passionate about that
and I've researched that to the nth
degree because we'd watch people fade
away. We'd watch them go into liver
failure. We'd watch all sorts of bad
things happen. And the eternal question,
what can I do to help myself was
nothing,
>> you know, and it just got to the point
where I decided I just felt compelled
to, you know, look into these things and
go start talking about them.
Yeah, you brought up so many interesting
things there that that the fact that so
many things are patient led and and the
history of that question are we doing
more harm than good and I think back to
the I don't want to date you. I'm sure
you but
>> go ahead.
when the NCI was its most active and
experimental in the late 60s early '7s
they were pushing chemotherapy
absolutely to the utter limit
>> and I remember James Watson at that time
the discover co-discover DNA was said
that we may poison the first act so much
that no one's going to want to see the
second act meaning all this experimental
stuff will we even get um it was so
horrific that they didn't know if they'd
see good outcomes ever but um
>> and the patient land. It reminds me of
the radical masectomy back when when it
was horrific surgery and it took the
women
>> to absolutely the patients had to rise
up and demand the trial of a lumpctomy
versus rad and and they were calling the
>> the sponsors of that trial murderers
because they thought the radical
masectomy was the only way forward and
when they got the results that it was no
better you know than a simple lumpctomy
but it was patient driven and yeah so so
that there's always been attention in
oncology, right? And
>> absolutely,
>> right? So, so without doing too much
history, I know we have a lot of
patients here. What what's your advice
to when integrative oncology I know has
is means a lot of different things to a
lot of different people.
>> When you get a patient, what's your
approach? What's your methodology?
And yeah, from the I'm sure it's nuanced
with each patient, but is there sort of
is it still? Yeah,
>> it's it's it's assessment based. It's
you know it's got to it's got to be
individualized got to be assessment
based. We we've gone through the days of
where you know back in early days as it
were a lot a lot a lot of what was
termed alternative integration oncology
was quite gurled. people followed they
wanted to follow uh Gersonen therapy
they wanted to follow somebody who did a
you know you know a fasting somebody who
did that they wanted somebody tell me
what is the answer what is the answer
what is the process that's going to get
me better and of course you know we know
that everything is so individualized you
have to work out what's going on for the
individual person and that's where
that's where the you know the revolution
and the evolution is taking place
entirely I mean I
I have to say where we are now compared
to 25 years ago is an incredibly
exciting time to be an integrative
oncology. You know, it's incredibly
exciting all the different elements that
we can pull together to the point where
there's this there there's too much for
any one individual, any one toy to just
sort of say, "Yeah, I" and one of one of
my big issues, and I'm so glad we're
over that now, is a lot of people who um
don't use some sort of methodology,
don't use some testing, don't know
what's going on, they're taking things
sometimes for fear of missing out on
them. you know, they're being mentioned
by relatives and somebody's cousin who
did it and this that and the other.
That's kind of how historically a lot of
people get to this and now we're in a
place where you know assessments can
really help. So I trained um a little
while ago when Na Winters MTI which is
very method
methodically driven in assessment you
know the test assess don't guess. I
managed to do that without mimicking her
American accent for the first time. I'm
quite impressed with myself. So, um, and
that's very the and there's different
elements to look at and it really
depends Travis on where where the person
is at in terms of what's happening with
the cancer of course that has to be the
element. How, you know, how aggressive
is it? What is their situation? Are we
focused? We need to we need to I'll talk
about the train in a minute, but we need
to do the train because that's that's
the answer. But we also need to focus on
the cancer and it's nuanced in terms of
where that focus is and some of that is
driven by the cancer situation and you
know we'll come to Astron and testing
with mutations but it's also driven very
much by the individual where are they
physically emotionally spiritually
financially it all has to fit that. So
it's it's it's as cancer is it's
massively individual. Um you know I I
remember you know when we were looking
years ago we they were looking at so
interesting when they discovered you
know about mapping the genome and the
thought then from the oncology days when
I was there was we're going to go to
gene therapy because we're going to find
that genetic map for every cancer type.
And this is this is the element that
we've got to evolve from is is treating
cancer as a type as oncology still does
to a large extent treating it as one
type you know and we can treat everybody
within that because they did think if
you remember um that you know you're
going to look at pancreatic cancer and
find out what the genetic code of
pancreatic cancer is and lo and behold
they mapped it and everybody's entirely
different and it's made up of all sorts
of different things. So swank there goes
gene therapy to a large extent. So yeah,
it's it's um we have we have so many
ways of assessing now um and you know if
you look at you know the two major real
um revolutionary drawers in modern age
you know as as with you know Sigrid was
fantastic in setting us out on the
metabolics and how that was working and
then Nisha Winters making that into a
precise evaluation of blood work and
getting a real time picture of how the
person's immune system is actually
doing. Never have in mind is there well
is there white cell count and K how is
everything else within that context of
what we can interpret how that is doing
and how the inflammatory markers are
doing where we can pick out that the
cancer might not be doing okay but you
know the person isn't we then have the
other kind of real revolution which you
know Jam Mlennon and the cancer pathways
and how we can establish what's
happening and precisely block So between
those two kind of joints that have led
us to this point um my my particular I'm
I'm I'm kind of doing the you know I
term it a game of chess
working out which moves um as a service
uh you know we do that I arrange
treatments anywhere around the world I
know all the clinics etc. Um, so
basically people come for that really
bespoke bespoke approach and work it out
to fit them. But as I say, it's it's
it's it's got to it's got to be able to
fit in
not just with the them. It's it's it's
about them rather than the cancer to a
large extent. It's got to be.
>> It's fascinating. It made me I don't
know that this is going to be a far
reach but it made me think of the
financial world where you have all these
people trying to beat the market and
there's the one person who does the fund
of funds and each fund specializes in
one niche where you can with with all
the information that you talked about
there there's no way you know the
original ethos of medicine that a doctor
was a sovereign entity is gone just
because the amount of information out
there has outstripped any any
individual's human ability to do it. So
that specialization now is critical and
you know and in the integrative world
you take on many hats but that patient
right you brought up inflammation you
brought up um metabolism and I think
those are two areas where it will or is
so incredibly important but just don't
have you know it's so incredibly
difficult to fit that into the the
regimen of traditional ecology. what
we're trying to do with the ketogenic
diet trial, you know, is do that. But
that you you said you sort of had um an
epiphany about metabolism
uh the importance of metabolism which
you know we know is was really ignored
very
>> and I look at the ketogenic diet and the
the number of things that it's doing um
which is preparing and again we we're
not that it it bothers me that the
integrative oncology um is is set
against standard of care. Absolutely
not. It is it is Yeah, absolutely.
>> Trying to complement it. It is not a
there shouldn't be a tension there. Um
but the way it prepares the body for
traditional therapies um is remarkable.
>> So yeah.
>> Yeah. And that's that's it's that
synergy and it's it's slightly
staggering and disappointing that
standard of care don't re don't really
have a great idea what we're doing and
how much we can you know I'm I'm
presenting at the life conference on
Saturday and I'm I'm kind of
deliberately presenting three very
integrative um success stories that's
worked enormously well um where you know
it hasn't done any of the fabled things
such as interfered and got in the way
and uh caused a lot of problems. We've
learned enormous amounts about how we
can really um enable things to work
well. But you know I I think I think the
conversation needs to be flipped. I
think we need a completely different
conversation
and that is because we know always from
traditional chemotherapy we get short-
termism in terms of resistance
developing enco genes get switched on
different pathways come on. We know we
get that we get um with targeted
therapies with pathway inhibitors etc.
We are get different levels of side
effects. We might get some kinds of you
know and there are different influences
that will affect how successful they
are. Imunotherapy requires you know it
requires a hot tumor. It requires te-
cell influ infiltration. It requires a
very healthy gut. But if you flip the
argument and sort of say okay what
happens if you don't do an integrative
approach? So you're having what are you
know still effectively quite toxic drugs
then we might have moved you know into
into a slightly different era they're
still very toxic you're doing those and
your immune system is going your
hemoglobin is down your inflammation is
up your white cell count down your
neutriight differentiation is gone
what's happening there you're heading
for an inability to maintain your immune
system and no control over the cancer
whatsoever
if the treatment slips and the guts
going. So that's getting into a mess. So
the microbiome is going that's affecting
the brain gut axis that is making the
person depressed. The person is then
getting um a large degree of
malnutrition from the taste changes.
They're not able to eat properly.
They're also getting um a large amount
of inflammation and they're getting
oxidative stress that's affecting their
energy. So they're not eating, they're
not exercising, they're depressed. How
on earth are they going to do well?
>> It's you know I mean so many people sort
of say it just makes sense.
>> It absolutely does. It just makes sense.
>> Yeah.
>> Why why would you do that? Can I just
tell you about this is a bit funny but
this from years ago years ago my son was
I don't know he's about 14 madam
military stuff studying um studying
World War I at school and he came home
to me said oh yeah he he talks endlessly
um and he's very interesting but he's
going back world war one I went yeah
that's that's where chemotherapy comes
from what that's where chemotherapy
comes from this first chemotherapist
must have gas Yeah.
>> Yeah. I just go
>> the B.
Yeah. I said he said, "Have you given
people mustard guess?" Yeah.
I I I I changed in his eyes. He already
did. I forget. But you know, and you
hear yourself saying that to a 14y old
and you know,
>> madness.
>> It's a bit remarkable. It's it's it's
when you look at the technological
advances in the world. um you know and
both of you and I agree you know we
would there's obviously value in those
medications but but just from a 30,000
foot view the fact that all this change
and we're still using you know the
mustard gas type drugs developed in
World War II in radiation which was over
100 years old
>> uh but yeah there like you said for the
people listening there there are so many
ways to uh to mitigate the side effects
from from uh chemotherapy and I I think
of Walter Longo UCLA which again he had
a very difficult time convincing uh to
to be able to do the trial but he simply
had the patients fast um you know a safe
fast 48 to 72 before chemotherapy
>> so they entered the state of ketosis but
the the remarkable they didn't measure
outcomes as an end point they are now
>> um but it was it was simply to to look
at side effects and they were remarkably
diminished the number of times patient
vomit vomited went to zero. Hair loss,
mouth sores, things you can objectively
measure, right? So
>> I I I found I found it remarkable, you
know. I I you know, I I I I knew the
research, etc. When we began really
encouraging it, it was like, wow, it was
a real wow. What's it, you know, what
they talk about, you know, we can talk
about, you know, glutamine restriction
and all the rest of that. What's the
cheapest, simplest thing you can do
against cancer? Fast. you know, heal
your gut, reduce inflammation,
um, you know, help the liver. Brilliant.
Absolutely brilliant.
>> And we talk about, you know,
inflammation a lot, right? And and and
the literature is replete with
>> inflammation driving cancer. I think of
a study that was done, I think it was
the 50s, two brothers, and and the study
was so simple. I love the simple studies
because they just focus on one question.
They they injected cancer cells into the
portal vein and rats. So it established
um liver cancer. The control group they
did it and then the the treatment group
what they did is they just made an
incision across the belly of the rat and
it let it heal in about a week and did
it again. And then they autopsied the
rats and the the ones that they did this
incision on again this is provoking
inflammation at a distal site from where
the tumors were setting up shop
>> they exploded. The tumor volume and
number were just off the charts compared
to the the control group. So that that
having that systemic inflammation um is
is is sort of you know it's
underappreciated but but you and I both
share a passion for the amount of data
out there and this is what we're trying
to do at
>> AS that
>> it is absolutely impossible for anyone
to collect it all to have it in one spot
and you really have to sift through it
like I I'll read one to you and and this
is on inflammation read why I have it up
this was a phase three trial at 654
community and academic centers
throughout the US over 200 patients. The
trial just looked at um celicoxib in
cola cancer in addition to stair
>> when so when they did the the subgroup
analysis they found that patients with a
pick 3ca mutation had a 50% reduction in
the risk of death when they added
celakovska
>> and how many that it to to us it's it's
that kind of information should be
populated in EMR they should have access
>> should should know about that but it's
not there's just no mechanism for that
to get to get uh because there's simply
because there's no FDA paperwork filed
and approved right
>> so it just sort of lingers
>> yeah and that's that's you know and
that's why the whole integrative
community has been has has been
completely driven by people who quite
rightly um they they they they don't
accept that you know that they're just
going to allow resistance to develop
that they're going to allow themselves
to become unwell. It's such a game of
chance and it always has been. And that
hasn't changed. It's changed a little
bit with the people who do manage to get
profiting. That's changing. But for a
lot of people, it's take it off the
shelf. Let's hope it works. We're not
going to do anything to influence that.
We're not going to do anything to help
you recover.
And that that's that's, you know, for an
awful lot of people that is not good
enough. and
>> they they're the giants that have driven
this. Yeah.
>> Yeah. And father is
>> I would frame it too that you know they
they they have a job um
that that is very that's got guard rails
right in the US we have the the payers
are really driving the bus. They will
tell the oncologists what what sort of
chemo regimen what path treatment
pathway is paid for. And so they're hand
they are to a certain degree handcuffed
where yeah and they have limited time to
where they probably can't talk about
fasting and they can't talk about um you
know all of these all all the other data
that that is relevant. So
>> I I I frame it as they they have a job
and then and then what I would love to
see and I'm sure you would love to see
is a fourth branch of oncology. outside
>> and I think of it as metabolic oncology
but again once you establish it and have
sort of guardrails then there's going to
be integrative outside of that and
that's where that kind of wild west
comes in and what I what we're trying to
do is um sort of add a standardization
to what we think a best practice is in
our our area areas with drug repurposing
>> you know and that that again as you know
is is a very um there are so many ways
to approach it I'm sure if you go from
one clinic to the next there will be
different drugs And what you see in the
popular media is there's always a drug
deour. And I think like like right now
probably ivormectin and bendazol is
getting all the pressed where there's
probably better ways to approach that.
How do how does your how do you approach
drug repurposing at your clinic?
>> Uh well we we we from a a um point of
view we use a prescribing pharmacist
Janine Mill who um and we have a
basically a kind of multi-disipline
routine approach. I uh I've got a listic
dentist in the team and we uh you know
kind of do research etc. decide, you
know, I think we spent about well, I
don't know how long looking at ovme
before we decided, yeah, okay, you know,
a a were happy being we've got a good
source. Um, and we go gently, carefully,
lots of evaluation going on. She's uh
she she's excellent at that. Um, but it
has to, you know, um, in combination
with communicating with the old
colleges, we're making sure that
everything's being assessed, elected.
That's how things have got to be done.
You know, I think back in my early days
of cancer options, one one of the things
there was as much as encouraging people
to take on an integrative approach was
helping them evaluate the wild west and
what was going out there. My god, there
was something in those days uh far less
now.
>> But yeah, you know, there is there is um
a tendency for all things to trend.
There's a tendency for certain people
you know are doing loads of juicing to
become gurus and people you know are
very attracted to that and it's it's
it's harder work to establish uh you
know for an individual to work through
this this is this is why you know we
have all these amazing um practitioners
being trained now you know we have some
in England but particularly on the MTI
are all being trained in a very
methodical way to work through it
because it could, you know, it's always
has been. It's it's it's um it's it's so
disempowering to become overwhelmed with
information. And it's also so
disempowering whether it's standard of
care or on the integrative side
>> for a practitioner not to be working
towards the person becoming their own
healer because that's actually where the
end point is. There's many different
ways of getting there,
>> you know. No, no, nobody nobody's got
the, you know, I've got all the answers.
It's a it's a, you know, it's a game of
chess. It's a nuanced approach. But if
if you try to go there without
empowering the person, without educating
them, I love it when my clients start to
argue with me. Once again, no, I don't
think so.
>> Just
>> love it. Love it. Because they could be
entirely right and and some of that is
then they're going instinctively. I
think I'm going stink.
Um it you know that's because a
disempowered person and this is one of
my big my big bug bears with what's
always gone on in encology is the
effects we have on the psyche and still
do where you tell someone I know how
long you're going to live.
>> Yeah. I know. I know cuz I'm I I know
how long the drug works. That's how long
you're going to live. And no, there's
nothing you can do to help yourself. I
just find this is appalling. Um, you've
got no control, no power here. And we're
going to do stuff that, you know, most
people come through that process with a
degree of PTSD.
>> They come through with a vagal nerve
fried, they come through with fear. Even
people who we've got into remission,
it's still quite a process to get
>> through that, you know, and that's as
important as anything else. I remember
nature saying to me once if I could I
would for six months not do anything
about someone's cancer only work on
their mind not possible obviously
>> but you know that's that's so powerful
isn't it
>> it's so powerful it's underappreciated I
I go back to
>> when you look at epidemiologically
which people live the longest the the
biggest risk factor by far is loneliness
and and not and part of that integrative
approach is that team approach and the
the the mental side of it. And they
there's a big study in breast cancer
where they had um the women that did not
have a supportive team that were on
their own, the prognosises were were
vastly different from those that were
had support group.
>> Yeah. So it is part of medicine that's
underappreciated. is and and another big
aspect as well is and this is a big
issue is is is when someone's trying to
um you know work with someone like me or
work with one of the great practitioners
and the oncology team are telling them
no it's a load of rubbish and they sort
of get that torn between aspects and it
you know it's it's it's very
pressurizing and that's happening less
and less thank goodness I've just been
invited to work with somebody who's
going through a stem cell transplant I
used I used to work on transplant unit
and that's great cuz that's a really
really nuanced thing to do but it's been
with a yes fantastic welcome you know
we're we're going to do all of this
together and that's the dream
>> that is the dream
>> the not dream is having someone feel
like the in the middle of a wall
>> when really they're sensibly trying to
help themselves
>> right right
>> can I can I just jump in there just
because Patricia said something it tags
in it tags in really closely with a
couple of questions that have just been
asked
>> and So, so Arlene um asked how close do
you think we are to the dominant
treatment system in in the UK that's
obviously NHS uh to accepting and
incorporating a more specific and
holistic approach to treatment and
related to that Andrea has asked but in
the UK doesn't anything you recommend
have to fit in with your MDT stroke
oncologist or do we just abandon them so
>> um to touch on those
>> um Yeah. So, sorry, how close are we to
that? It's changed tremendously. The,
you know, the the the walls are creaking
most definitely. And a lot of that is
and and I got to say, you know, to be
fair, I mean, if I go back to my early
days, oncologists were advising against
this cuz they were trying to protect
people because there was a lot of
nonsense going on as well. So, you know,
it's not it's not like, oh, we're just
being ignorant. No, they were trying to
protect people, but they've never been
educated in this. But the re, as we say,
Travis, the research now is
mind-blowing. The amount of research on
why would you not do this is is is now
completely mind-blowing. I think the
issue we have in the UK and this is
something I you know I'd love to see
change is we don't get a uniform
response from the medical world. We just
don't. And people say to me oh you know
what will my oncologist say? I don't
know until we go and ask them and I'll
happily communicate. We'll tell them
what we're doing etc. And generally when
we're, you know, completely upronted and
all the rest of it, vast majority of the
time it's either accepted or if they've
got elements that they don't like,
they're not happy with. I mean, my my
rule of thing is I'll always change it.
I got I got many things I can do, you
know, and if they they've got an issue,
right, that's fine. And if they got a
good argument, that's fine. Um some
people unfortunately
if they find that they're really you
know have got a bad relationship well
then they ought to be thinking about
changing their oncologist because that's
a massive pressure going to see them and
some people do decide to do things their
own way and that's that's their choices.
>> Yeah.
Yeah. I uh
one thing that just to go back Patricia
to some of the methodologies
there's nothing more intellectually
satiating I think for a patient knowing
that they can fight their cancer with
their own immune system and you had
talked about
>> how so many of these therapies decimate
the immune system and I think what
what's going to happen now there's a
huge void with with imunotherapies as a
new kid on the block we know that under
certain circumstances they can work
fantastic and other times They don't.
>> Yeah.
>> Um probably dependent on the on the
patients. Again, lost data. We found a
study Pat and I
>> I think it was conducted in Japan. It
was a phase phase three trial
>> on a certain uh colostrum probiotic um
that increased
>> by a lot. So So the immune system is so
complex and fascinating. Do you where
what what what what's what sort of
approaches you said to prepare them for
checkpoint inhibitors um to test and
look for? Well, exactly that. Um, you
know, do do a gut test, um, you know, if
you go to some, you look at some the
work of some places like, uh, Williams
Cancer Institute in America,
>> you know, um, where they're going to
turn a cold tumor up into a hot tumor,
you know, you you you want to get as
much analysis as you can.
>> Um, you know, because one of I mean, for
example, there's a lot of kind of
selling of dendrotic cell therapy at the
moment in Europe and as an alternative
to cancer. Well, there's a there's a
whole story around that about, you know,
is the person at an appropriate point to
be able to maximize their their benefit
from it. So, again, that comes down to
to to the testing. You can you can
establish how healthy the gut is. You
can establish make sure there's no
pathogenic gut bacteria in there. Make
sure that the their immune system is has
has been maximized to that. You know in
some of the places in the world where
they get really good responses from im
amunotherapy you know they will do fecal
gut transplants
>> so you ensure yeah you know you can get
a fecal gut transplant on the LHS if you
got Crohn's disease
>> which which is with Crohn's really okay
>> you know that's with cancer though
>> yeah I I I always because you know these
books I I always look at the history of
medicine and the fecal transplant is one
of the most remarkable stories there is
because
>> yeah and look
>> like a lot of the things that pop up in
cancer uh it was a DYI you would go to
YouTube to do it because you couldn't
get it and everybody knew you could fix
C diff which is a horrible problem I
think 30,000 people in the US die every
year from CES most of it acquired in the
hospital after antibiotics right
>> you go and then the the if you don't
respond to firstline antibiotics it's a
horrible spiral downward but but fecal
transplant 99% of the time fixed it and
if you didn't the you know the 1% you
just did it again and nobody had any
idea how to incorporate that but it took
you a long time and tens of thousands of
people were doing it online. So that
that's fascinating.
>> That's interesting. I had no idea about
that.
>> Yeah. Yeah.
>> Yeah. Yeah. It's it's a remarkable story
but but that's that's shocking that you
can get it for Crohn's but and that it
could have a role in preparing.
>> Oh absolutely. It could, you know, it
could take people on because one of the
problems always is you're time
pressured. You're time pressured where
you are in someone's um treatment cycle.
Okay, we're moving them on next to the
imunotherapy. Yeah. in an ideal world, I
want to spend three months working on
that car and I can't, you know, so
you're all the time kind of doing the
best you can and then bringing in the
other things that work uh that are
really going to help, you know, like
hypothermia, like hyperbaric oxygen at
the appropriate time, ozone. I'm very
big on I mean, my my my big my big my
big trending thing for me research wise
this year is is is bacteria and oral
bacteria. You know, we've just seen um
paper out this week about oral bacteria
and pancreatic cancer, which we've known
for a long time, but it's finally, you
know, these things are now kind of
hitting hitting the media. And that ties
in because, you know, the big the big
thing the big thing, isn't it? What is
the big question that has never ever
been answered properly is why what is
protecting cancer cells? Why do all
these massively expensive big high-tech
drugs why do they only do so much and
they never actually get rid of it?
What's what is that protective
mechanism? And that that for me is the
most fascinating thing about integrative
oncology of where the research is going
that we are unraveling that so so
actually standard a care to some extent.
So we've always known you know as as see
free fantastically teed us up with the
metabolic approach with glucose etc. and
inflammation and lactic acid. So the
whole environment of the body is being
is is is actually enabling cancer cells
and it's disabling is disabling the
pathways that the immune system will
use. So we change that and we oxygenate
it and we use hypothermia and we make
sure that the nutrition is there and
that that is that that you know that is
absolutely been um fantastic. But you
know now move moving on from that um the
analysis is is is going to show us what
we need is the real- time analysis and
that's coming isn't it you know of what
exactly are the cells doing at the
minute cuz doctors will say okay but
there's no point in a diet there's no
point because yeah it was you know if
you start off glucose they'll switch to
glutamine. Yeah but has it? We don't
know and you know and then what you
going to do about that? Well, you know,
we know we haven't got drug- based amino
acid blockets at the moment, but they
will come most definitely, but you can
combine you can combine fasting with
using things like cucetin and uh all the
other things and we'll block it. So, you
know, you you you can work out that
nuanced approach if you've got a better
idea of of exactly where you are.
>> Yeah, it's it's remarkable. We have we
have a company here called Fate
Therapeutics which uh one of the
co-founders is Sedarth Mukerji who wrote
the book the Omalades um and if you read
it it's one of the best books I've ever
read in my life. is so beautifully
written but it's a you know the
basically the biography of the history
of cancer and where he arrived but he
doesn't mention warberg once right it's
through this l of genetics
>> of a genetic disease
>> um but where he's arrived now faith
therapeutics is what they call insulin
suppressive diets
>> um which is a ketogenic
>> and starving it of certain amino acids
so it's it's very much focused on what
you just said how do we deprive these
cells of what they're using
nutritionally and macro, you know,
macromolecularly.
So yeah, there's a lot to be you know
obviously
>> there is there is and and I think you
know when when when you look at the
threads or the common
elements that have come together over
the last you know sort of 10 15 years
the research and the elements that are
being used and back to what is
protecting those cells you know moving
on from that metabolism we've got the
impact of viral and bacterial cells
Yeah.
>> And cancer cells taking their you know
Mark Linton does exfoliated this in is
in his research that cancer is forming a
fungus because something is protecting
those cells and then you look at the
things that have been used for quite you
know if you look at metformin you know
that's very much an antifungal drug as
well as an anti-lucose drug and the
other elements and we are seeing very
very good results from repurpose drugs
no doubt about it particularly in
combination with chemotherapy actually
>> really really evolking it. Yeah. Yeah.
So
>> and Mark presents that is what what I
appreciate very much is he he he's the
first to say I may not be right but I
just want people to look at this which
is to me
>> is what science is. I mean you look at
this of science
>> uh the people that moved it forward were
initially always very much chastised. I
think of the was called the oxos wars.
guy that first proposed on mitochondri
worked was demonized to the point where
he almost committed suicide
>> fit and in the end he won the Nobel
prize for it. So yeah just just consider
the data it is you have to be agnostic
and and because these theories will come
obviously from the peripheral but it's
always worth looking at the data.
>> Yeah
>> and it is interesting I all kinds of
microorganis
is t present right?
>> Yep.
>> Yeah.
by, you know, the massive amount of
colon cancer we have in young people has
been caused by E. coli, but not
uncommon.
>> And a lot of that is coming, you know,
if you go and buy yourself a nice
healthy pack of um packaged lettuce or
leaves in the supermarket kit that's got
that lovely warm moist environment in
there. Um it's just ripe with ecoli.
>> Yeah. Yeah. And those things live
>> they live in there, don't they? All the
time. The bad bugs with the good bugs,
>> right?
>> Absolutely. they are there waiting for
that it's that perfect storm for
everybody you know emotionally
physically the you know the the the
final straw that breaks the camel's back
so you know people need to know this so
they can take those different elements
out
>> yeah I don't want to um miss any
questions from
>> I was just going to say trap there's
there's there's a few uh with a a bit of
a thread to them um so Benjamin has
asked how useful is the vendol venazol
the tovastatin metformin and methylin
blue. Um Terry's asked, "Do any
integrated doctors use hypothermia or
create a highway fever in patients to
kill cancer? I hear that can be can be
very effective." Um Benjamin's also
asked how useful is oxygen therapy for
cancer in general. Um so just a few
things there, repurposed drugs,
hypothermia, oxygen therapy for cancer,
and I suppose the key words there are in
general. Um, so I just thought, you
know, uh, with everything you've
discussed and the nuance and the
personalization and the training that
you've had before.
>> Yeah.
>> How how would you kind of address those
things because often we have patients
that come to us in the clinical setting
exactly as you said, saying this worked
for someone else. I I have FOMO that if
I don't do this, I'm missing something.
And what you're doing is trying to
translate that there's vast number of
interventions into a thing that with the
best available evidence is right for
that patient sitting opposite the table.
>> Yeah. And um you know as I was going to
say a generalization to one of those yes
they all have their place
>> most definitely in in in in my
experience and you know people don't
want alternatives. People want the best
of everything. Nobody's got saying oh
you know I I you know I want to be
combative against the medical world. We
want to have the absolute best of
everything. And what you know with what
we're learning if you there's clinical
trials going on in America where they've
stated that viral and bacterial cells
which are promoted by a glucose pathway
are what's stopping chemotherapy working
and they have a pathway blocker or that.
So they they they were kind of catching
up on us most definitely. So one would
look at you know there there's several
things you'd look at. You'd look at
first of all you want to if anyone's
familiar with snips and that's too big a
issue to go into but from a a a analysis
and safe point of view you want to look
at can can the person's body use that
drug then you need to look at is it
going to interfere with everything that
the medical world is doing that's that's
an absolute we don't want to do that we
want to enhance it and then look at what
are you yeah it's not difficult at all
to plot what are the you know if you're
if someone's on a certain chemotherapy
what are the resistance pathways a
cancer is likely to take okay so where
we going to put our blockade up which
which elements are going to be be
blockaded there and you look at you look
at that metabolism of the counselor and
what the drug might do and it's it's not
it's not difficult to work out a nuanced
approach for someone I also personally
um always have one eye or resistance
developing so I'd like to swap things
around regularly I think I think you
know there isn't a winning combination
but keeping keeping things fresh keeping
it on its toes as well. You will come in
and out cuz I say there is we now have
so many repurposed drugs it's too many
for anyone to take. You got to look
after the liver. You got to look after
the guys. The there's a million things
to consider now. Definitely. But um
yeah, the the repurpose drugs has been a
big big game changer. Most definitely.
Um I think you mentioned hypothermia.
um as part of preparation as part
hypothermia and oxygen therapy are both
part of the changed body's environment
stop it protecting cancer nowhere would
you go to any of the big expensive
clinics integratively around the world
that they wouldn't first it's about
preparing the cells um I was going to
give an analogy then but it makes me
sound really old so I'll leave that one
but um you've got you know it's about
preparing the cells before you treat it
so don't just don't just throw cancer in
uh sorry, throw chemotherapy in and hope
that it works and leave it. No, prepare,
you know. So, if you've got opportunity,
hypothermia, oxygen therapy, boost the
immune system, get things get things
ready, thus lowered glucose, etc. Do all
that, then give the chemotherapy. You'll
be amazed at how well it works.
Absolutely. And nowhere you go
integratively that they are going to
want to do those things. Now we do with
option therapy you have to look at
certain situations that it's not
encouraging cancer cell to grow. We you
know we we we have that knowledge. Um
hydrogen therapy is proven to be very
useful in reducing inflammation and um
oxidative stress tissue healing. So uh
all all of those things and then as well
as I say you know detoxing how is the
body coping with it. You know, this we
had an old saying in nursing actually.
Um, throwing chemotherapy at resistant
cells is a bit like shouting louder at
somebody who doesn't understand English,
which is kind of what oncology has
always done. They just kind of thrown
the chemo in there. The nuancing is is
is to work with it. Is to work with it
and to work with it in a way that then
the person has a quality of life. They
they they have an emotional life. They
they are psychologically in charge.
That's that's that's the real balance.
And if that means less chemotherapy, you
know, so I'm not a big fan of maximum
tolerable dose. I think we can do better
with less, but you know, that's that's
that's a conversation.
>> Someone just asked about hydro vitamin
C. One one thing that I noticed because
a lot of those therapies
>> um are oxidative in nature and I think
that's sort of
>> underappreciated that
>> is that a lot of these operate through
this giving the cancer cell an
intolerable amount of what's called ROSS
reactive oxygen species
>> and I think that go again goes back to
also where people can get too much
information where they're then throwing
>> antioxidant into that mix which are you
know
>> yeah you're not switching you're not
switching to the oxid Ive
>> right which highos vitamin C is as you
know very well is an oxygenative
therapy. So does that with those sort of
modalities that overlap I where does
highdose vitamin C kind of fit in
>> it it it it fits in but it has to be a
complete switch from what the person is
doing. It has it has to be um if you can
use you know hyperbaric oxygen and
highdose vitamin C with a short space of
time of each other and you're fasting
you're in ketosis and that's what you're
doing you're going to you're going to
you know it's going to be quite
impressive if you're mixing in you know
if you just got you've just got the
mixing bowl out and you're mixing it all
together you're likely to enolify the
effects of the different things
definitely but you know it's it's you
know we we we We we we have ways of just
working out what's the right thing to do
at the right time.
>> The right time. Yeah. No one said this
was going to be easy, right? That it's
>> the universe has no obligation to make
it easy.
>> It gets more I then that's that's a
challenge for any any any practitioners
who are watching this. You know, one of
the biggest challenges we have now um
certainly I think is the amount of well
I mean the the the amount of potential
things we can help people with is
enormous. the amount of information
we've got is enormous. So, it's all
about it's it's it's always always all
about um prioritizing what are our range
of objectives, what we're doing at this
point in time, what are we choosing now?
And that's fine. That's enough. People
often have a bit of and they can overdo
this with nutrition sometimes. They they
can't do enough to help themselves. And
it's and that's part of you know when
you've been in the fear factory when
you've been in oncology and and every
the very language we used to talk about
cancer is very fearful very very fearful
>> war. You're fighting a war.
>> Yeah. I I I remember I remember looking
and it really stuck with me. I look
around my ancology clinic one day and I
said to one of my nurses the atmosphere
was terren. It was just I could I was
like going very sensitive to this sort
of thing. And I says to her, I said,
"Where do people go to scream?" You
know, because they must want to because
we we were very nice. We were very nice
and we very controlling and we told him
nothing. So,
>> you know,
>> yeah,
>> that's you know that's that's the
change.
>> It creates that environment. Yeah.
>> Well, we have what do we have? We have
about eight minutes left. Pat, do we
have is there any more questions? I I
well I was going to ask a question
actually Patricia because I think one of
the hardest things for for look me as a
as a doctor and I'm sure with you as a a
practitioner and many other other people
here and you mentioned it earlier when
you talked about chemotherapy and short
termism. One of one of the hardest
things is like I say it to patients
sometimes is to hold the line in the
face of a scan that doesn't do what
conventionally we've been told we wanted
to do. We're getting a good result. I
remember when I first started at um in
this field 10 12 years ago now and I you
know was junior and I'd come from you
know my life as an NHS um you know
cancer doctor and smaller volumetrically
on a scan it was a good thing and when
faced with you know patients with
glyobblasto gone through six months of
chemotherapy after surgery and
radiotherapy and they were met with a
stable scan and their oncologist saying
yeah well it could have been better
could have been worse
and and these people were sort of
looking at me thinking, you know, you
don't know what I'm going through and
you haven't done this. It's really easy
for you to say that stability is a good
thing. With the 10 years of experience I
have now, some of the patients that have
done best, as you mentioned, were the
people that we did hold the line. We
didn't overtreat, we didn't go for the
LED scan, the shrinking the volume
because actually we understand the
cancer cells evolved in the face of, you
know, evolutionary stresses and stimulus
them. Yeah.
>> Exactly. So how how are we going to how
are we going to build that into what
we're what we're doing? Because you know
even even you know when you're seeing a
patient and you recommend a variety of
strategies and the next scan is
equivocal or the next tumor marker is
slightly up. How do you manage that? Is
it is it just time? Is there a
particular communication strategy? Is
that how do you how do you sort of the
gray areas I suppose?
>> Yeah. Yeah. Absolutely. And you know by
by no means is everything so black and
white that everything we do just works
and it's one of course not you know
there's nothing can cancer is
unpredictable and I think I think as a
practitioner there's one thing you know
you are you are going to have the you
are going to have the difficult
conversations you're going to have the
uncomfortable conversations but also
part of that my you know my big thing is
right from the start it's it's about the
person you're you're teaching the person
how to manage the situations. It's not
just about dealing with a cancer. That's
the least of it. It's how to manage
things psychologically.
And if something doesn't work, we learn
from it. You know, you can analyze what
why why didn't that work? What have we
been doing? What have we not been doing
enough of? You know, it's it's it's
project management. It's project
management. And you you know, you you
know, you stay calm and you go again.
And if it can be that you know, I mean,
I I'll just give you an example. This is
a beautiful example and I always feel
like it was a dream. Um I I was working
I got asked to work with a client in um
oh gosh got rushes now 10 years
somewhere like that and um she was very
she got she was terrified of doing any
chemotherapy and I met her I met her
online and the the thing that was
striking she had beautiful spiritual
support for an American church but she's
terrified of chemotherapy and she said I
want to do repurpose drugs what it is
but her breathing was pretty bad and I
said I don't think we've got time
because this stuff takes longer and
sorry it's in Ethiopia and so we did it
for a couple of weeks and she got worse
and I says I really you know I I I think
we need to look at this and her
oncologist was kind of involved and then
her oncologist came to the consultation
and
and we kind of discussed can we use some
chemotherapy that's going to help here
and can we work with that and she she
you know the client agreed to do that.
It wasn't her like first choice but she
agreed to do that. But the the
remarkable thing about this was that
oncologist came with such grace and
respect and held the person with respect
and absolutely said you know you know I
I'll do some I'll do it less you know
we're not going to make you really ill
etc. And then when she commenced the
treatment it's been transformative. I
won't say I was surprised. Gosh, I
shouldn't tell the boys, but it tells
it's been beyond my dreams that this
person um you know everything has
improved. Her breathing's improved,
tumors are shrunk. Her oncologist
because we use repurpose drugs alongside
and that, you know, Ivormectton is very
good for sensitizing chemotherapy
and she wants to write it up in the
medical journals over in Ethiopia now.
And you know that's that's the dream of
having a relationship like that with a
person who's holding respect and is is
going into it not scared
and I do a lot of work with clients on
managing fear side of it and a lot of
that is looking at how oncology and how
it looks at cancer the short- termism of
it and why that is always invariably for
the large port failed.
So this is a different way of looking at
it. And that's that's really important
to have that view of it's about healing.
It's not just about bashing cancer cells
on the head.
>> Yeah. How you frame it. How you frame
it.
>> You got to you got to reframe their
relationship with cancer. Totally.
>> Right. I remember a study from the 80s.
It said for lung cancer there was
surgery and radiation. Um and surgery I
think was a little better than
radiation. the outcomes. Those are the
choices. And if the doctor said you have
a um 10% chance of death,
uh began it with that um if you do this
or you have a 90% chance of survival,
the patient would choose the one that
was the positive one even though the
data was exactly the same.
>> Yeah.
>> So how things are framed matter. Words
matter.
>> Yeah. I wish oncologists were aware and
trained of the power of their
relationship, the power of their
communication and how they could be such
a positive force for people.
But you know and and some are a lot are
you know a a lot a lot are great but I
do get I do get the horror story
sometimes.
>> Yeah. And it's real. I mean
>> it's real happens
>> is a real effect. So this
>> we we pretend you know we have this
reductionist view of of and you know I'm
I fall victim to that too as a
biochemist of how everything works from
a reductionist angle this pathway this
>> but there there's a lot we just don't
appreciate and don't don't understand
about about the way you know the mind
body connection
>> I think you know I I often say to people
I don't worry very much too much about
people's cancer situations because I
know that they can be amazing people are
capable of amazing things given the
right situation. I worry about the
person if they've been absolutely
terrified by what's happened to them and
they're in a state of high stress and
PTSD.
That's that's that's the first job.
>> And I would love to see support, you
know, more support and I'm sure you do.
And when people do um achieve remission,
uh you know, you just don't go back into
the world again. You have that
lingering. So, you want some sort of
>> support. I my mom had had endometrial
cancer and I was there with her last
appointment and they said, "Okay, you're
done. Go home. Goodbye." And she had a
50% chance of a recurrence according to
the data.
>> Right.
>> Well, Patricia, it's 11 o'clock. Um, we
can't thank you enough for this. I'm
sure people are going to have more
questions, but we will um we'll do our
best to to uh follow up with everybody,
but um
>> yeah, we'll get those out.
>> Go enjoy your anniversary. You spend
enough time. Going to go going and
appease my husband. Yeah, absolutely.
>> Yeah.
>> Remember it this year, but just right,
>> right?
>> My record is not great, I have to say.
>> Well, let's see yours pile up. I'm in
the same I'm in the same camp.
>> Well, we get away with it. We're fine.
>> Yeah. Well, thank you again. Thank you
for everything you do. You're you're a
beacon of light in this community for
everybody. Thank you for going on behalf
of all of us.